KEP-4212: Improve Node Maintenance (#4213)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-apps/4212-improve-node-maintenance/README.md

  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

> Currently, there are many issues that exist during the node drain phase. This KEP analyzes the
> issues and proposes a new API for node maintenance. This API can be used to implement additional
> capabilities concerning node drain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This KEP proposes adding a declarative API to managed node maintenance. This API can be used to implement additional capabilities around node draining.
```

Author: Sounds better, thanks!

## Motivation
The goal of this KEP is to analyze and improve node maintenance in Kubernetes.

Node maintenance is a request from a cluster administrator to remove all pods
from a node, so that it can be disconnected from the cluster to perform a 
software upgrade (OS, kubelet), hardware upgrade, or simply to remove the node
as it is no longer needed.

> Currently, Kubernetes supports this use case in the following way with `kubectl drain`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes has existing support for this use case in the following way with `kubectl drain`:

```

Author: Updated. Part of the process is declarative (PDBs),  so I would rather not introduce `imperative` into the the text here  to not confuse anyone.

> Currently, Kubernetes supports this use case in the following way with `kubectl drain`:

Author: please see https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4213#discussion_r1333468669

1. There are running pods on node A, some of which are protected with PodDisruptionBudgets (PDB).
2. Set the node `Unschedulable` (cordon) to prevent new pods from being scheduled there.

> 3. Evict (default behavior) pods from node A by using the eviction API (see [kubectl drain worklflow](https://kubernetes.io/images/docs/kubectl_drain.svg)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Evict (default behavior) pods from node A by using the eviction API (see [kubectl drain flow](https://kubernetes.io/images/docs/kubectl_drain.svg)).
```

That image link may not be around in the future, FYI.

Author: I have added a perma link to the kubernetes/website repo with a commit hash, which should be around hopefully forever :) I prefer not to duplicate the resources if I do not have to.

4. Proceed with the maintenance and shut down the node.
5. Kubelet can try to delay the shutdown to allow the remaining pods to terminate gracefully
   ([graceful-node-shutdown](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/nodes/#graceful-node-shutdown)). 

>    It can also take the priority class into an account ([pod-priority-graceful-node-shutdown](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/nodes/#pod-priority-graceful-node-shutdown))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The kubelet also takes Pod priority into account ([pod-priority-graceful-node-shutdown](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/nodes/#pod-priority-graceful-node-shutdown))
  when sequencing graceful shutdown.
```
What the kubelet sees is a `priority`, not a `priorityClass`.

The main problem is that the current approach tries to solve this in an application agnostic way
and just tries to get rid of all the pods on the node. Since this approach cannot be applied

> generically to all pods, we define special [drain filters](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/56cc5e77a10ba156694309d9b6159d4cd42598e1/staging/src/k8s.io/kubectl/pkg/drain/filters.go#L153-L162) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
generically to all pods, the Kubernetes project has defined special [drain filters](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/56cc5e77a10ba156694309d9b6159d4cd42598e1/staging/src/k8s.io/kubectl/pkg/drain/filters.go#L153-L162)
```

that either skip groups of pods or an admin has to consent to override those groups to be either
skipped or deleted. This means that without knowledge of all the underlying applications on the
cluster, the admin has to make a potentially harmful decision.

From an application owner or developer perspective, the only standard tool they have is
a PodDisruptionBudget. This is sufficient in a basic scenario with a simple multi-replica
application. The edge case applications, where this does not work are very important to
the cluster admin, as they can block the node drain. And, in turn, very important to the
application owner, as the admin can then override the pod disruption budget and disrupt their
sensitive application anyway.

List of cases where the current solution is not optimal:

> 1. Single replica application have to tolerate application downtime during the node drain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Without extra manual effort, an application running with a single replica has to settle for
   experiencing application downtime during the node drain.
```

Reviewer: BTW this also affects the minimum scale for HorizontalPodAutoscaler.

Author: I have added a new `2.` point which talks about HPAs and references the relevant issue: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/93476

Author: Thanks for bringing this up

   They cannot use PDBs with `minAvailable: 1` or `maxUnavailable: 0`, or they will block node
   maintenance. Not every user needs high availability either, due to a preference for a simpler
   deployment model, lack of application support for HA, or to minimize compute costs. Also,
   any automated solution needs to edit the PDB to account for the migration pod. This hase been
   discussed in [kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/66811](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/66811)
   and in [kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/114877](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/114877).

> 2. Graceful deletion of daemon sets is currently only supported with graceful node shutdown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Graceful deletion of DaemonSet Pods is currently only supported as part of (Linux) graceful node shutdown.
```

   The length of the shutdown is again not application specific and is set cluster-wide 
   (optionally by priority) by the cluster admin. This does not take into account 
   `.spec.terminationGracePeriodSeconds` of each pod and may cause premature termination of

>    the application. This has been discussed in [kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/75482](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/75482)
>    and in [kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/6158](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/6158).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   the application. This has been discussed in issue [kubernetes/kubernetes#75482](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/75482)
   and in issue [kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api#6158](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/6158).
```

Author: +1, updated the issue formatting

3. There are cases during a node shutdown, when data corruption can occur due to premature node
   shutdown. It would be great if applications could perform data migration and synchronization of 
   cached writes to the underlying storage before the pod deletion occurs. This is not easy to
   quantify even with pod's `.spec.shutdownGracePeriod`, as the time depends on the size of the data
   and the speed of the storage. This has been discussed in [kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/116618](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/116618)
   and in [kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/115148](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/115148).

> 4. There is not enough metadata about why the node drain was requested. This has been discussed in [kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/30586](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/30586).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. There is not enough metadata about why the node drain was requested. This has been discussed in  issue [kubernetes/kubernetes#30586](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/30586).
```

  discusses the problem of blocking PDBs and offers several workarounds. Similar to others also
  offers a force deletion, but also a less destructive method of scaling up the application.
  However, this also interferes with application deployment and has to be supported by the
  application.

To sum up. Some projects solve this by introducing validating admission webhooks. This has a couple
of disadvantages. The webhooks are not easily discoverable by cluster admins. And they can block
evictions for other applications if they are misconfigured or misbehave. It is not intended for the
eviction API to be extensible in this way. The webhook approach is therefore not recommended.

As seen in the experience reports and GitHub issues, some admins solve their problems by simply
ignoring PDBs which can cause unnecessary disruptions or data loss. Some solve this by playing
with the application deployment, but have to understand that the application supports this.

### Goals
- Kubectl drain should not evict and disrupt applications with max surge ability and instead

>   politely ask them to migrate their pods by creation of NodeMaintenance object. 

Reviewer: Good to discuss as an alternative. A drawback that I see is that the taint would _not_ honor any configured PodDisruptionBudget.

Imagine an unusual workload that prefers to runs all its similar-but-different Pods on the same node; they're attracted to one another and scheduled onto only two nodes within the cluster. However, the workload also has a disruption budget with max unavailable set to 3. Tainting one of the nodes would evict many Pods at the same time, right? Whereas what we probably want is gradual eviction that honors the PodDisruptionBudget.

>   politely ask them to migrate their pods by creation of NodeMaintenance object. 

Author: As @sftim said , PDB support is a very big hurdle. I have described this approach in the alternatives section and added a few disadvantages I could think of.

>   politely ask them to migrate their pods by creation of NodeMaintenance object. 

Author: @fabiand I am marking this as resolved. Please open a new disscussion under the `Use Taint Based Eviction for Node Maintenance` section in alternatives if needed

  overridden by the priority list mentioned below.
- NodeMaintenance could include a plan of which pods to target first. Similar to graceful node
  shutdown, we could include a list of priorities to decide which pods should be terminated first.
  This list could optionally include pod timeouts, but could also wait for all the pods of a given
  priority class to finish first without a timeout. This could also be used to target daemon set
  pods of certain priorities (see point above). We could also introduce drain profiles based on
  these lists. The cluster admin could then choose or create such a profile based on his/her needs.
  The logic for processing the decision list would be contained in the node maintenance controller,
  which would set an intent to selected pods to shut down via the TargetedByNodeMaintenance
  condition.
- Introduce a node maintenance period or a TTL optional field as an upper bound on the duration of
  node maintenance. Then the node maintenance would be garbage collected and the node made
  schedulable again.

## Proposal
Most of these issues stem from missing a standardized way of detecting a start of the node drain.

> This KEP proposes the introduction of a NodeMaintenance object that would signal an intent to

Author: please see: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4213#discussion_r1333468669

gracefully remove pods from a given node. This should complement the node's `.spec.unschedulable`,
which prevents new pods from being scheduled on such a node. We will focus primarily on
`kubectl drain`, but the API can also be used by other drain implementations as well (e.g. node
autoscalers).

We will first introduce the NodeMaintenance API and then later modify the behavior of the
Kubernetes system to fix all the node drain issues we mentioned earlier. The name, NodeMaintenance
is subject to change; please see the alternatives section for other suggestions.

To support workload migration, a new controller should be introduced to observe the NodeMaintenance

> objects and then mark pods for migration with a condition. The pods would be selected according to

Author: This is meant as the application migration. I have tried to edit the places with migration to be more specific. Please let me know if you feel it is still confusing.

Pod restart could be also confused with the container restart, and technically during the workload move it will be a new instance of the pod.

the node at first, but the selection mechanism can be extended later. Controllers can then implement
the migration. The advantage of this approach is that controllers do not have to be aware of the
NodeMaintenance object (no RBAC changes required). They only have to observe pods they own and react
by migrating them. The first candidate is a deployment controller, since its workloads support
surging to another nodes. This would help to eliminate downtime not only for single replica
applications, but for HA applications as well. 

### User Stories (Optional)

#### Story 1

As a cluster admin I want to have a simple interface to initiate a node drain/maintenance without
any required manual interventions. I also want to observe the node drain via the API and check on

> its progress. I also want to be able to discover workloads that are blocking the node drain.

Author: We would only report the summary in `.status.targetedPods`. For the rest, the user would have to filter out all the pods that have `TargetedByNodeMaintenance` condition. (We really should come up with a better name for the condition).

Other tracking or required information could be added to the NodeMainteannce status later if needed.

> its progress. I also want to be able to discover workloads that are blocking the node drain.

Author: > While it could be out of scope of this kep: With this change I still not see a good way of determening the drain status.
How does an admin know if all relevant pods were evicted - or not?

Currently in the KEP, we are marking all the pods, knowing that not all of them will be deleted (see drain filters). This is problematic. We should discuss the selection and reporting logic with wider audience.  

- Should we target all pods or just the ones we know can be deleted (drain filters)? The later will allow us to incrementally add features into NM, such as support for DaemonSets. And be compatible with `kubectl drain`. The first approach would allow third-party applications to react to the pods we are unsure about.
- If we target all the pods, should we report the expected pods to be deleted in another status field?

> its progress. I also want to be able to discover workloads that are blocking the node drain.

Reviewer: You / we can mark than in an UNRESOLVED section and save that for a decision after the first alpha code merges.

> its progress. I also want to be able to discover workloads that are blocking the node drain.

Author: Ack, I have added these question under the UNRESOLVED block to the `NodeMaintenance Controller` section. And I have added another todo under the `NodeMaintenance API` section as well.

#### Story 2

As an application owner, I want to run single replica applications without disruptions and have the
ability to easily migrate the workload pods from one node to another.

> 

Reviewer: There's a third story if we want it: cluster autoscalers want to both have nodes drained, and to signal that intent to drain via the API.

Signalling the intent is useful. For example, it's something we can copy into relevant Events.

Author: +1, I had this one in mind, but for sure it is better to describe it explicitly.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

> ## Design Details

Reviewer 2: While it could be out of scope of this kep: With this change I still not see a good way of determening the drain status.
How does an admin know if all relevant pods were evicted - or not?

Author: please see https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4213#discussion_r1333501889

that could be checked before disrupting any workload (see below). If the cluster,
doesn't support the NodeMaintenance API, kubectl will perform the node drain in a backwards
compatible way.

`kubectl uncordon` will be amended with `--node-maintenance` option. This can be used to delete the
NodeMaintenance object together with marking the node as schedulable again. The default value of
this flag will be `false`.

### NodeMaintenance API

NodeMaintenance objects serve as an intent to remove or migrate pods from a particular node. We will
also support setting a reason for the maintenance. It is unclear whether we should allow marking the
maintenances as finished and keeping the old maintenances in the system for bookkeeping purposes.

As an alternative, it would be possible to mark the node object instead of this API. But it is
probably better to decouple this from the node for extensibility reasons. As we can see, the
`kubectl drain` logic is a bit complex, and it may be possible to move this logic to a controller
in the future and make the node maintenance purely declarative. It also helps to decouple RBAC

> permissions from the node object.

Reviewer: This might want to go in Alternatives.

Author: ack, moved to alternatives

```go

type NodeMaintenance struct {
    ...
    Spec NodeMaintenanceSpec
    Status NodeMaintenanceStatus
}

type NodeMaintenanceSpec struct {
    NodeName string

> 	Reason string

Reviewer: If we want to support a node selector here, is there a way to add that support?

Author: I am not really sure if we want to support the node selector. It would make everything more complex. I think it is better to leave the node selection logic to the node orchestrator, and it should not be a big deal for it to create multiple NodeMaintenance objects.

It might be possible to add the node selector support later if we wish, but hard to do it the other way around.

Still, I would like to hear other people's opinions on this as well.

Reviewer: What I mean is a [for but not with](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/For_but_not_with) design: making sure that even if this API reaches v1 / GA, there **is** a feasible way to have a node selector.

So long as the API leaves room for it, we do not need to implement the selector logic or API field at all.

Author: Got it. This is a very good remark - we should make the API general enough so that the support can be added later. And let's keep this information in mind at every step (API, implementation, documenation) so we don't unknowingly put up barriers to it. 

I have updated the ` NodeMaintenance API` section in the KEP to reflect this.

Reviewer: Thanks. I consider this resolved.

	TargetedPods int32
}
```

### NodeMaintenance Controller

Node maintenance controller will be introduced and added to `kube-controller-manager`. It will
observe NodeMaintenance objects and set `TargetedByNodeMaintenance` condition on selected pods.
The pods would be selected according to the node. Controllers that own these pods, would observe
them and start a removal or migration from these nodes upon detecting this condition.

The selection process can be later enhanced to include priority or pod type (to target daemon sets
which we do not currently support).

The controller would also remove the `TargetedByNodeMaintenance` condition from the targeted pods
upon premature `NodeMaintenance` object removal.

The controller can then show progress by reconciling `.status.targetedPods`, to show how many pods
remain to be removed from the node.

The controller would also emit a warning event if the targeted node was not marked as unschedulable.
We could prevent this, by stomping on any changes to the node's `.spec.unschedulable` field and set
it to true for the whole lifetime of `NodeMaintenance` object.

### Deployment Controller

> The deployment controller will watch its pods and react when it observes pods with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ReplicaSet controller will watch its pods and react when it observes pods with
```

Author: yeah, this section was very roughly written. I have updated it to include more details how it would be implemented

   maxSurge (deployments) or based on the Surge API (see below)
2. If set to a number (int or percentage), it would override the detected maxSurge and use only the
   maxSurge value in the PDB object.

```go
type PodDisruptionBudgetSpec struct {
    ...
    // if true, prevents disruption of all detected surge pods
	// if integer or percentage, prevents disruption of the defined amount of surge pods
    MaxSurge int32|string|bool // can we do BoolOrIntOrString ?
    ...
}

type PodDisruptionBudgetStatus struct {
	...
	// total number of pods that are expected to surge during a node maintenance
    ExpectedSurgePods int32
	...
}
```

The disruption controller should check whether a workload guarded by a PDB has a pod surge capability.
If it does, it should report `.status.expectedSurgePods` to allow cluster admins to assess which PDBs
are blocking cluster upgrade. If the `.status.disruptionsAllowed` equals to 0, because for example
`.spec.maxUnavailable` is equal to 0, the cluster admin can assess that the PDB will not block
cluster upgrade if he or she observes `.status.expectedSurgePods` greater than 0.

> ### Surge API (Optional)

Reviewer 2: With NMO APi or a taint - workloads and controllers could watch for the maintenance request/operation.
If it can be observed, why would we need a Surge API?

Author: To support the PDB use case for max surge applications. Disruption controller would use this API to compute max surge resilient status for these applications.

Any CustomResourceDefinition or built-in type could implement a surge API. This could be a
subresource similar to a scale API, that would serve for advertising the surge support. If a
certain workload supports a pod surge, then one of `.status.availableSurgeReplicas` or
`.status.currentSurgeReplicas` values will be positive.

```go

type Surge struct {
	...
	Status SurgeStatus
}

type SurgeStatus struct {
	// number of replicas that can surge during an application rollout or node maintenance
    SurgeReplicas int32
	// current number of surge replicas that are running above the normal amount of replicas
	CurrentSurgeReplicas int32
}

```

This API would be then used by kubectl and disruption controller to reason about the capabilities
of an application. It would be similar to how we use the scale API in podControllerFinders in
disruption controller.

### Node Drain Process: Before and After

The following diagrams describe how the node drain process will change in respective to each
component.

Current state of node drain:

> ![drain-before](https://kubernetes.io/images/docs/kubectl_drain.svg)

Reviewer: I recommend copying that diagram into _this_ repo.

Author: updated with a better link, see discussion: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4213#discussion_r1333444863

      how can an operator troubleshoot without logging into a master or worker node?
    - Mitigations: What can be done to stop the bleeding, especially for already
      running user workloads?
    - Diagnostics: What are the useful log messages and their required logging
      levels that could help debug the issue?
      Not required until feature graduated to beta.
    - Testing: Are there any tests for failure mode? If not, describe why.
-->

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

## Implementation History

<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer: My alternative:
I think we could implement NodeMaintenance out-of-tree (CRD + out-of-tree controller).

Author: I have added the alternative and described the disadvantages this would bring.
